---
title: Arminius and Flavus
subtitle: Drama in One Act
author: Marc Zuo
tags: theatre, history, philosophy, fiction
---

<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="/css/theatre.css" />

###Dramatis Personae

<p class="dramatis-personae">
Arminius  
Flavus   
A Cherusci guardsman
</p>

<div class="theatre-play">

###Scene I 

<p class="theatre-play-didascalia">Enter Cherusci guard, followed by Flavus.</p>

<div class="theatre-play-character">Flavus</div> We have arrived, then, I presume?

<div class="theatre-play-character">Guard</div> We are here, aye.

<div class="theatre-play-character">Flavus</div> Then this… _(glances around)_ This is the home that I
have dreamt of for twenty years? Where my father lived and fought?

<div class="theatre-play-character">Guard</div> Aye, this was Segimer’s lodge, the same as it was
when you were born. The same as it was when the Romans came.

<div class="theatre-play-character">Flavus</div> And where is my brother?

<div class="theatre-play-character">Guard</div> Arminius is out hunting. He would not say when he
will come back.

<div class="theatre-play-character">Flavus</div> Then I suppose I will have to rest here and wait.
Did he perchance tell of what he might be hunting?

<div class="theatre-play-character">Guard</div> Eagles, or so he said when he left.

<div class="theatre-play-character">Flavus</div> Should I suppose that a joke?

<div class="theatre-play-character">Guard</div> That is not for me to say. They say that your Roman
teachers have given the two of you a most bewildering way of speaking, if I should dare to say.

<div class="theatre-play-character">Flavus</div> They say? You mean the people of the tribe?

<div class="theatre-play-character">Guard</div> Aye, my child. Folks have been saying so ever since
Arminius came back. That no one among us can understand the way he speaks from time to time.

<div class="theatre-play-character">Flavus</div> I suppose it is not such a surprise to hear. Both
of us have been away for so long, after all. But I am surprised that he would go on a hunt on such
short notice; he has always been the sort to plan everything carefully beforehand.

<div class="theatre-play-character">Guard</div> He did seem to leave in a hurry.

<div class="theatre-play-character">Flavus</div> Oh, but I do apologize. It is no matter to me,
really, old sir. But, in that case, do allow me to ask you a few questions, since my brother isn’t
here to answer them himself.

<div class="theatre-play-character">Guard</div> Ask, Flavus. I will answer as well as I can.

<div class="theatre-play-character">Flavus</div> Tell me, then, were you serving the tribe when I
was born?

<div class="theatre-play-character">Guard</div> Aye, Flavus, I saw you when you were born here. Not
Arminius, though; he was born before I became a guard.

<div class="theatre-play-character">Flavus</div> But you did see both of us when we left with the
Romans.

<div class="theatre-play-character">Guard</div> Many years ago, aye.

<div class="theatre-play-character">Flavus</div> Then you may yet help me settle a question that I
have had in mind for all those years.

<div class="theatre-play-character">Guard</div> You need only ask, Flavus.

<div class="theatre-play-character">Flavus</div> I have always wondered… did… did my father, I mean
to say Segimer, did he weep when we left?

<div class="theatre-play-character">Guard</div> Oh, but that happened so long ago, Flavus, I know
not if I can still call it to mind…

<div class="theatre-play-character">Flavus</div> Just remember as well as you can, old sir.

<div class="theatre-play-character">Guard</div> To be truthful, I can’t say I saw or heard him
weeping. He looked most gloomy for a time, but he wouldn’t weep, not in public or inside his lodge.

<div class="theatre-play-character">Flavus</div> I see.

<div class="theatre-play-character">Guard</div> Was that the answer you expected?

<div class="theatre-play-character">Flavus</div> I believe I had expected a certain answer, I think,
but it is as if all of a sudden I have forgotten what it was.

<div class="theatre-play-character">Guard</div> I’m sorry if I disappointed you.

<div class="theatre-play-character">Flavus</div> Oh, please don’t be. The mind is troubled by
uncertainty, and uncertainty alone; when one knows the answer, then perhaps it will have turned out
not to matter at all.

<div class="theatre-play-character">Guard</div> I can’t say I understood that very much, but I am
pleased if you are, Flavus. The whole tribe is happy that both of our sons are back, you know.

<div class="theatre-play-character">Flavus</div> Thank you, old sir. It is very kind of you to say
so.

<div class="theatre-play-character">Guard</div> Will you then stay, Flavus, like your brother? He
has done much good for the folks, even if sometimes we can’t all quite understand him.

<div class="theatre-play-character">Flavus</div> No, unfortunately. I can stay only for a few days,
after which I will have to go back to Pannonia.

<div class="theatre-play-character">Guard</div> Is it so? Then I bid you good luck with all my
heart, my child, though it pains all of us to see you leave again.

<div class="theatre-play-character">Flavus</div> I appreciate your thoughts, kind sir. As a matter
of fact, our forces in Pannonia are having quite good fortunes, and our general is even talking
about conquering Dacia. It is but for their success that I’m permitted the occasion to visit home.
_(sudden clamor)_ But what is that noise? Is my brother back from his hunt?

<div class="theatre-play-character">Guard</div> _(looks in the direction of the noise)_ Quite so,
Flavus. I shall take my leave, then; Arminius said he wished to speak with you alone when he is
back.

<div class="theatre-play-character">Flavus</div> I bid you farewell, then, good sir. Do please let
my brother know that I am eager to see him as soon as he can.  

<p class="theatre-play-didascalia">Exit Cherusci guard.</p>

###Scene II

<p class="theatre-play-didascalia">Enter Arminius.</p>

<div class="theatre-play-character">Arminius</div> Oh, but by the heavens, it is you, my dear
Flavus! Tell me, has the journeys been pleasant to you? And I hear of the victory in
Pannonia—Germanicus must have been most pleased, I daresay, if he would give you the leave to come
home. Varus and I were joking about it yesterday over dinner, as a matter of fact, that he is so
much more lenient than that mistrustful upstart—but really, I should introduce you to him at the
first chance. I’m confident you’ll find him a much more amenable general than Germanicus. But I do
get ahead of myself. Have you need of food? Water? I trust the old guardsman has properly attended
to your needs?

<div class="theatre-play-character">Flavus</div> It’s good to see you, too, brother. I have no need
of anything at the moment, but I am quite curious to see those eagles you have been hunting.

<div class="theatre-play-character">Arminius</div> _(laughs)_ Ah! Right! The eagles. Sadly, as you
might imagine, hunting eagles is not such a simple task. I have not had any luck so far, I must say,
though I’m confident that with a little tenacity I can yet catch an eagle or two quite soon.

<div class="theatre-play-character">Flavus</div> With a little tenacity and that sword of yours?

<div class="theatre-play-character">Arminius</div> And what’s wrong with my sword?

<div class="theatre-play-character">Flavus</div> It’s worrisome, that’s all; eagles do, after all,
fight back, as you no doubt know, not to mention that they will fly away if you get too close.

<div class="theatre-play-character">Arminius</div> Not if you get the jump on one. You wait
patiently in the forests until just the right moment, when the eagle is too preoccupied to notice
you; then you leap at it, plunge your sword right in its throats before it has a chance to fight
back or flee. It’s the same as hunting any other animal, really.

<div class="theatre-play-character">Flavus</div> Sounds like it will involve a lot of waiting,
unless you set a trap for it.

<div class="theatre-play-character">Arminius</div> Then I suppose I will have to set a trap.

<div class="theatre-play-character">Flavus</div> And what will you use for an eagle trap, hmm?
Rotten meat, presumably?

<div class="theatre-play-character">Arminius</div> If that’s what it takes.

<div class="theatre-play-character">Flavus</div> And you won’t be revolted at the stench of rotten
meat?

<div class="theatre-play-character">Arminius</div> If the eagle is not, then why should I be?

<div class="theatre-play-character">Flavus</div> Why should you be? Perhaps because the stench will
taint you irreparably, if you have to linger around it for too long when you wait for the eagle to
come? Would the prize of a caught eagle be worth a lifetime of bearing the stench, of seeing even
those who had helped you in the first place coming to be disgusted by you?

<div class="theatre-play-character">Arminius</div> But of course it is! Tell me: which one amongst
the ancient heros, both those of our own people and those of the Romans, had not achieved their
great deeds without, so to say, each catching their own stench, of which they should rightfully
deserve to be ashamed? And yet, when we speak of those heros, is it not with a most reverential tone
that we count their greatness, and do we ever once reproach them for whatever blemish that they may
have borne in their own lifetime? Time, Flavus, time washes away the stench for those who succeed in
Herculean tasks, so that even knowing that they had borne such a stench, posterity will still praise
them for all that they did accomplish.

<div class="theatre-play-character">Flavus</div> You say that as if you will linger beyond your own
lifetime, to hear the praises that posterity will heap upon you.

<div class="theatre-play-character">Arminius</div> Perhaps not; but what does it matter? Is it not
forever men’s struggle to earn the immortality that comes with being memorialized by posterity for
their deeds? And is not even to strive for it without knowing whether one is successful or not a
worthy enough goal?

<div class="theatre-play-character">Flavus</div> And you are trying to win that immortality by
hunting for eagles?

<div class="theatre-play-character">Arminius</div> Quite so.

<div class="theatre-play-character">Flavus</div> Even if those eagles are not by nature opposed to
you, but rather come to you often and count you as a friend?

<div class="theatre-play-character">Arminius</div> That they are foolish does not detract from the
worthiness of the goal.

<div class="theatre-play-character">Flavus</div> Then we will speak plainly and not with metaphors,
Arminius, since I already appreciate that you are not dressing up your motives with some grandiose
appeal to ancient freedoms, as so many in history have. You do know how thoroughly tired of those
appeals I am.

<div class="theatre-play-character">Arminius</div> Very well, then. There is a plot, yes, and we
will expel the Romans from Germania once and for all.

<div class="theatre-play-character">Flavus</div> I was hardly in doubt of that. But do tell me: what
if your plans succeed, and you drive the Romans away from Germania? Then what? Should we simply go
	back to the ceaseless quarrels between the tribes? And should we expect the Romans to give up
	and never to come back?

<div class="theatre-play-character">Arminius</div> If we succeed, Flavus, then we will have
thoroughly destroyed all of the legions that are garrisoned in Germania. It is the only way. Every
time I have departed on one of my "hunting trips", I have in fact consulted in secret with a council
of chiefs. And I am confident, now, that we have a way to accomplish it. The Romans will have no way
to recover from that shock, and all of the other tribes will be so awed that they simply must accept
my kingship…

<div class="theatre-play-character">Flavus</div> So you do seek to be king.

<div class="theatre-play-character">Arminius</div> Do I not? Is that not the way of the world? Rome
has one master now; has had for quite some time, to be sure. If Germania will cast aside its Roman
chains, and—make no mistake—it can only do so with my help, then it will have to accept those of
mine.

<div class="theatre-play-character">Flavus</div> Oh Arminius! Do you not yet see how the stench of
the rotten meat will soon taint you, with which you will have to hunt the eagles? Do you understand
what you are asking for, when you say that you plan to forge your own chains for Germania?

<div class="theatre-play-character">Arminius</div> Power, of course! It is with power, and power
alone, that men leave their marks on history—and it is with such marks, my brother, that we escape
the piteous condition of mortality, of living with this overwhelming dread every passing day, every
passing moment, and with every breath, that this is one’s last, and that death will in the next
instance efface each thought that we have had, each memory that we cherish, and soon—when in death
we have all been recast as that ugly, frightful, unthinking, unmoving corpse, among which no
difference can be found, that we be reduced to dust, forgotten for all of eternity. You ask me if I
understand what I ask for—trust me, my brother, I understand it all too well. Such power will be the
undoing of me. I will have to renounce all of my friends; those among them who are Romans will spit
on me and seek to strangulate me as a traitor to the fatherland as soon as they set my eyes on me,
even as now they would carry their most precious casks of Caecubian wine, made from only grapes from
the best vineyards of Italy, all the way out here to Germania for me, not because they seek to
please me, but because they count me among their friends. And those of them who are German will
detest me for the chain that I put on their nourishing mother, whom they cannot envisage but as
fiercely free and independent: and so Germania won’t submit to a king without deadly struggles, in
which those who are dearest to me will be at the forefront, racing with each other to slit my
throats and to consecrate the blood that flows out in atonement for all my transgressions against
her. So, again, you ask me if I understand what I ask for: to which I must respond, yes, my brother,
I am making a sacrifice, of the sort that mythic heroes have all had to contend with, so that by
abandoning all that alleviate life’s dreads they may seek to lift that which most universally plague
mankind.

<div class="theatre-play-character">Flavus</div> Oh, brother, how I envy you and dread your lot at
the same time! Yes, your name will surely become immortal, if you can accomplish what you say you
can; but you see that only by making life not worth living by any means can you conquer death; only
by making life insignificant can you hope to make death so as well.

<div class="theatre-play-character">Arminius</div> It is a choice that all must face, Flavus. Do you
try to hold on to what you cherish in life, all the more so making the prospect of losing everything
in an untimely death more dreadful? For what man have taken to call "duty", if you strip away the
veil of self-righteousness that they inflict upon it, is simply the desire to consecrate this life
in the hope—and even though that hope is in far too many cases vain—that they may achieve the
immortality of the sort that I say, the only kind of immortality which in religion and in worldly
life can be found. It is the same immortality promised to warriors, to politicians, to priests, to
poets, that by giving up what they most cherish can they hope to conquer death itself. Tell me,
Flavus, what makes you get up every day in the morning and fight? Is it not something resembling
this sort of duty, by which you, too, might hope to one day win your own immortality?

<div class="theatre-play-character">Flavus</div> There you have mistaken, Arminius. I fight not
because I am prepared to sacrifice all that I cherish to "win my immortality", as you say, but
precisely because I cherish them so much that I am willing to go to any length to guard them: my
friendships, my love, my country. Yes, even there one can discern a difference; for even though men
have for ages said that to fight for their country is a duty, it is in fact not; one answers a duty,
as you say, purely for himself, so that in giving himself up he can have a chance at that elusive
immortality. Such men, were it not for the trappings of social regard that is artificially weaved
around him, which you and I rightfully disdain, would have gone to amazing lengths to gain power; it
is only by that artificial construction that he is kept from slitting the throats of his friends,
from betraying his country at the first moment when doing so might prove expedient to him. No,
Arminius, men like us fight from a love that pours out of the depths of our soul like a fountain, a
love for our friends, for those close to us, for our country—but purely for her own sake. We seek no
power, nor ever to be celebrated—as a matter of fact, we shirk from it; we seek to be forgotten. We
do that which is right, not because we are told it is right, not because by doing it we shall gain
power, but because it is what we deeply cherish. That is why I’m proud to serve under
Germanicus; for you can see it in his eyes the first time you meet him: he, too, is the kind to
cherish life and not to lightly give it away in the pursuit of immortality, the best of us. Oh, but
make no mistake—he will pay dearly for it. Being that way will cost him his life, when he is so
closely related to the emperor by blood; those who have already made preparations to sacrifice all
they have in life—those, that is to say, with nothing to lose—will always triumph over those who
hold on to life itself out of a profound bond of love.

<div class="theatre-play-character">Arminius</div> And you don’t regret it in the least bit? That
the forces of nature will win no matter what? To me, it is most certainly a great folly to love that
which you can’t possess for eternity.

<div class="theatre-play-character">Flavus</div> A folly, it’s true, is loving one’s life. But
sometimes even a folly is preferable to wisdom, when by being wise one is forced to give away that
which amounts to the whole of one’s experience.

<div class="theatre-play-character">Arminius</div> And if life is so brief and inconsequential, then
what is love of one’s life, if not a temporary illusion?

<div class="theatre-play-character">Flavus</div> If it is an illusion, then it is one without which
life is too harsh, in which worldly power becomes mankind’s only concern, and fear will forever be
the highest ruler of human action. No, Arminius, I need to love just as much as you need power, as
you need to drive away the spectre of being dead and forgotten. If it is an illusion, then it is one
that I need even to breathe for one second. That is why I will never let any quest of immortality
rob me of my friends, my love, and my unblemished consciousness; for even if I am assured that all
of posterity will know my name like they know their own father’s, their own wife’s and their own
children’s, still I shall never find contentment in my lot if I cannot embrace my friends
wholeheartedly or go to sleep with the confidence that I have not betrayed them.

<div class="theatre-play-character">Arminius</div> Surely, then, you must suppose me heartless and
unfeeling! But in truth nothing can be farther from the case: have you any idea how difficult it is
to sit by Varus, a man who in word and in deed consider me nothing less than his closest friend,
knowing that tomorrow or the day after that would be the day when I must plunge my sword into his
chest, and knowing that it would not be an act spurred by passion, but one for which I have
meticulously planned for many months? Power, Flavus, is its own poison, which nevertheless men are
driven to imbibe by fear of the immense shadows that lurk just beyond the land of the living. Such
is the greatest cruelty of life: knowing that there is a better course, knowing that contentment is
always within reach, knowing that the choice is ours to find happiness and fulfilment, and yet
nevertheless the choice is made for us, has always been and will always be.

<div class="theatre-play-character">Flavus</div> It is not made for me, Arminius. I will choose my
own happiness and peace of mind, and I will always reject the occasion for power when it is offered
to me.

<div class="theatre-play-character">Arminius</div> Then you must swear one thing to me, Flavus. One
thing and one thing alone, which, though oppressive fate herself seeks to suffocate me with her
intolerable might, shall yet comfort me in the days to come. Swear that you will not follow the
others, who, in their blindness, shall seek to attach such labels as “hero” or “traiter” to me;
swear that, when the whole world come to know me but as one of those two things, you alone, Flavus,
will know pity for me; that you alone will know, in your mind, that whatever power others will see
in your poor brother, he has in fact never had the power to perform even the most inconsequential
act of his own accord; that he, like all who came before him and all who will come afterwards, is
yet another victim of fate, crushed by the sheer weight that the mere fact of being alive entails
and ground down mercilessly until nothing remains of him but an empty name, doomed to live on
forever as witness of his unhappiness! O Flavus, Flavus, how I envy you, Flavus! How I envy, from
the deepest recesses of my soul, those who can permit themselves to pass serenely into death and
oblivion!  <!--TODO finish this speech-->

<div class="theatre-play-character">Flavus</div> This I promise to you, Arminius. Even if fate
should pit the two of us on the battlefield, as she very likely shall. For I have long come to
realize, brother, that on the battlefield there is no hero or traitor; that for all of us the only
enemy to overcome is our own immense, grotesque shadows, which chase after us relentlessly, like an
eagle after its prey, never according to us a moment of respite till the day we go to the lightless
realm of Orcus, a land without shadows and without the crushing burden of everpresent death.

<div class="theatre-play-character">Arminius</div> Then I am glad to have had this conversation with
you. Go, now, Flavus; join Germanicus back in Pannonia, and hither once again follow him to avenge
Varus’s impending defeat. We will see each other one more time—one last time, my brother, after
which all that matters will have already been carved into stone, and the cause of my unhappiness
will have been irreversible.

<div class="theatre-play-character">Flavus</div> O Arminius! But in truth, since I speak this as
your brother, I can barely stand to watch your agony. I will take my leave of you, then; what will
happen, like what has happened before, is out of our hands. I only wish that both of us will have
the courage to bear all that is yet to come.

<p class="theatre-play-didascalia">Exit Flavus; Arminius falls silent and barely acknowledges
him. A moment of silence.</p>

###Scene III

<p class="theatre-play-didascalia">Enter Cherusci guard.</p>

<div class="theatre-play-character">Guard</div> Arminius, your brother says that he is leaving.

<div class="theatre-play-character">Arminius</div> _(without looking up)_ I know.

<div class="theatre-play-character">Guard</div> And the uprising? Does Flavus know of it?

<div class="theatre-play-character">Arminius</div> _(still without looking up)_ He does.

<div class="theatre-play-character">Guard</div> Should I… _(hesitates)_ Should I try to stop him? He will bring words of it back to the Romans, no?

<div class="theatre-play-character">Arminius</div> What will happen is set in stone, Deganus, and Flavus knows it as much. Besides, he won’t reach his legion in time before our rebellion starts. Speaking of which, has Varus returned to his camp yet?

<div class="theatre-play-character">Guard</div> He has, Arminius, and we have made ready the trap as you taught us to.

<div class="theatre-play-character">Arminius</div> _(pauses for a second, then sighs)_ Then it is done; today I shall seal my own wretched fate.

A long pause as the two looks at each other awkwardly, the guard manifestly not having understood the words of Arminius.

<div class="theatre-play-character">Arminius</div> Forget what I said, Deganus. Tell me, then, what did you talk about with Flavus before my return?

<div class="theatre-play-character">Guard</div> Your brother asked me something. About your father. He wanted to know if Segimer had wept when the two of you were taken away.

<div class="theatre-play-character">Arminius</div> Ha! But, to be honest, it is a question that I myself have meant for some time to ask. Did he, then? Did he weep when we were taken away?

<div class="theatre-play-character">Guard</div> No, I don’t believe he did. I told Flavus as much.

<div class="theatre-play-character">Arminius</div> Then it is as I had always suspected. Was there anything else? Perhaps something that he said to you in the days after the Romans’ arrival?

<div class="theatre-play-character">Guard</div> Now that you’ve jolted my mind, Arminius, there was something.  

</div>

<p class="curtains">Curtains</p>

<p class="signature">Paris, December 2015</p>
